---
layout: post
title: "Containerising and deploying a jekyll-based blog site"
subtitle: "Hosting and developing this blog with in dev containers locally and kubernetes in the cloud."
date: 2024-10-27
background: '/img/posts/blog/header.jpg'
---

##### [The source and technical information about the project can be found in this github repository here](https://github.com/MaxHerbs/jekyll-instance)

---
## Motivation
[Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) is a ruby based website builder, designed to convert markdown into properly styled html. It has a significant community which produces a range of open-source templates, assets, and styles. It is blog-aware and outputs a static set of html and css - removing the need for bloated databases, maintenance, and providing better security than an active back-end. The main challenge of Jekyll is it's infrastructure - the focus of this project.

Containers are an excellent solution to remove the remaining maintainance. By containerizing Jekyll and bundling it with a webserver, the little maintenance can be almost entirely removed. These containers can then be hosted in kubernetes cluster - such as the Google Kubernetes Engine as done here - to make the website accessible at scale, and possible managed by ArgoCD in the future to remove all maintenance.

---
## Containerising Jekyll
This approach involves two layers of containers. I use [the first layer](https://github.com/MaxHerbs/jekyll-base) - the base - to manage dependencies. It is based on a ruby image, and includes the base dependencies such as the apache2 webserver, and exposes the correct ports. The repository contains a CI to build and host this image when a new tag is released, and provides a stable - but flexible - base image to build an instance on.

The second layer is [the instance itself](https://github.com/MaxHerbs/jekyll-instance). This image is built from the base. It contains the actual site, and a build script to move jekyll's output html into the webserver's directory. Again, there is a CI to build and host this image when tagged, providing a stable source for a kubernetes cluster to pull the image from.

To make development even simpler, both images have a dev container in their repositories - used to test the base image as well as developing, running, and viewing the site in the instance image. 

Currently there is also a spell-checking CI. This is more of a novelty than something useful - but it seemed helpful considering the amount of plain text given the blog posts. At the time of writing, this is currently not quite properly configure TODO: fix.

---
## Making the Site
Working with the site is incredibly simple in this setup, and the open-source backing of the project is fantastic with an endless range of [range of free theme](http://jekyllthemes.org/). 

To briefly discuss the process; each blog post is written in markdown - almost as plain text - with a front matter at the beginning of the document, such as the following for this post.


```
{% raw %}
---
layout: post
title: "Containerising and deploying a jekyll-based blog site"
subtitle: "Hosting and developing this blog with in dev containers locally and kubernetes in the cloud."
date: 2024-10-27
background: '/img/posts/05.jpg'
---
{% endraw %}
```

This is all required. Jekyll blog-ifys the markdown and pieces the links together to make a set of cohesive output html/css. This makes adding blog posts as easy as a word document.

---
## Deploying the Site to the Google Kubernetes Engine
Originally the plan was to host this site on a raspberry pi 4 at home, but after some thought, it seemed to make more sense to for the whole project cloud based. Google are fairly liberal with their free tiers, so I opted for the Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) - a cloud based kubernetes cluster which is accessed through their cloud platform

All layers of the image are built and hosted on Github by the CI to make the image accessible from anywhere, so after setting up the cluster, building the deployment, and adding a load-balancer service - the site was ready.

---
## The Future of the Portfolio
With the dev container making local development a dream, and the CI handling the majority of version control, writing each blog post has been incredibly easy. Currently theres not a huge array of projects on here - just the main things I've worked on over the last 2/3 months, but going forward, writing more should be easy!

Now most of the heavy-lifting when working with Jekyll is done - the CI, the dependency base layer etc. As such, this repository makes an excellent template for others to build similar blogs. Forking the [the instance repository](https://github.com/MaxHerbs/jekyll-instance), deleting (or building on) the `myblog` folder, and spinning up your own instance with a single command is all thats needed to start your own.

```bash 
$ jekyll new myblog
```

All of the dependencies and development quirks are handled, providing a foundation perfect for hobbyists and academics in any field to build their own as markdown is such a simple language to start with.